NUTRITION 130 (GEN ED BS 4 credits) NUTRITION FOR A HEALTHY LIFESTYLE SYLLABUS Spring 2023MWF 10:10-11 Small changes may be made to this syllabus and before and during the semester. If that happens students will be notified by email. Instructor <PROF_FULL_NAME> MS, RD, LDN 206A Chenoweth Student drop-in hours Thursday 11-12 Book: Please note that information on the book for this course is available on the Moodle page. The book is recommended but not required and is available as an etext.  iClicker: Because we will be using iClicker for 10% of the grade, I would recommend that you order this soon. I only useiClicker classic because I have found that there are glitches with the iClicker app that may result in a student not gettingcredit for all the sessions they responded to. Why I teach this CourseI teach this course because I love food and eating.  I was hooked by the subject of Nutrition the first time I realized that all the cells in my body were completely dependent on what I put into my mouth.  I want to help you learn about food, to make sense of the plethora of new and conflicting information about food. Mostly, I want to help you learn how to eat for long-term health, while being able to enjoy all kinds of food. Why You Should Take This Course Taking this course will help you evaluate what you eat and how to make sense of the sometimes-contradictory media reporting of new findings in nutrition science. You will learn the fundamental aspects of nutrition science. To understand nutrition scientific discoveries, you will need to understand how nutrition scientists make discoveries and how these findings are reported. We will also discuss the relationship of food and nutrient intake to health and disease within the US and globally. Teaching StatementI welcome all students into my class and I enjoy the diversity of majors and attitudes that I find in Nutrition 130. I encourage you to ask questions during class time as I believe that answering a question benefit everyone in the class. There is no such thing as a bad question, in my opinion. I welcome feedback on how I am doing to make an inclusive learning environment where everyone, including those with diverse learning styles, feel welcome and supported. I will usually wait after class for students to ask individual questions about classwork or other /questions issues you may want to chat about. I have had constructive feedback from students in the past and I am grateful to those students, they have helped improve the course. I encourage you to come to my student drop-in hours if you have any questions. If the scheduled time (Thursdays 11-12), does not suit you I will be happy to make an appointment with you, you can either email me, make an appointment though Navigate, or speak to me after class about a time. Nutrition 130 Class Broad Learning Objectives (Learning objectives for each topic will be presented at the beginning of the topic and class slides are posted on Moodle)  Learning Objective  How you will learn this  1. How food nourishes our bodies 1. How food influences our health  For both of these topics we will look at the impact of the different classes of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and the micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) and look at the health impact of the food choices we make.  2. Global Nutrition & Health Equity issues (to a small degree)  We will look at the causes of obesity from a genetic and health equity perspective and also look at nutrient deficiencies and their impact both nationally and internationally.  3. How to assess the validity of nutrition science reporting in the media  This is a recurring theme in this course. You will complete two Homework Assignments on this topic.  One has youcomplete the CRAAP test on three websites and the otherhas you compare a published nutrition article to its reporting  in a new article. There are also extra credit opportunities in which will be asked to read or watch media and subsequently defend your opinion on what you have read or watched.  10 Years from now I hope you can say:• I know how to decide what to eat • I don’t have an eating disorder • I am confident that I can distinguish between good Nutrition reporting and product marketing/exaggerated claims/bad reporting.  Nutrition 130 General Education Biological Science (BS) Learning Objectives This course fulfills the “BS” designation of General Education.. irement The purpose of the Gen Ed requ is to stretch students’ minds, broaden their experience and prepare them for: • College experiences and subsequent professi l ining. . Careersandproduct • ona tra ive lives • Community engagement and informed citizenship• A diverse and rapidly changing world • A lifetime of learning . Nutrition 130 must meet certain criteria to meet the BS designation. The criteria and the means of addressing them in this class are listed below. 1. The course should cover the fundamental principles of science. Nutrition 130 will cover the basic principles of the science of Nutrition as well as cover the anatomy and physiology of human digestive system. We will discuss the macro and micronutrients as well as relevant human disease states related to human nutrition. 2. The course should include critical thinking. At various times throughout the semester students will be presented with an in-class writing prompt. These will ask you to reflect on information presented in the lecture and ask you to consider an implication or analysis based on this information. You will need to defend your opinion in this writing prompt. This is not an exam, and we will share opinions on the prompt during class. In discussion, students are asked to analyze nutrient data, and adjust food intake to meet nutrient standards for a given inadequate diet. You will also analyze nutrient focused websites and compare research findings to reports in news articles. The extra-credit assignments posted on Moodle will require critical thinking because they ask you to read an article or watch a media piece and complete a questionnaire that will ask you to answer questions and defend an opinion based on what you just learned. 3. The course should address the relevance of the science and its impact on society. As we discuss each nutrient, we will explore the health and societal implications for the US and global communities of health issues related to that nutrient. We will pull apart the impact of genetics, human behavioral, human social factors and politics on health issues mediated through nutrition. We will discuss health disparity in the context of environmental associations with health and disease. A table outlining the overall BS GEN ED learning objectives of this course and are listed at the bottom of this syllabus. I have a question who should I contact: Who to Contact for What • Help Desk on Moodle o Any course related questions that may benefit yourself and your peers. o Professor Norton and TAs will check and respond to Help Desk questions on a regular basis, everyone in this class will be able to see the questions and responses. • Discussion TA: ONLY contact your discussion TA if: o You have questions about your grades for homework ordiscussion assignments on Moodle; o If you cannot attend discussion and want to make up for discussion work; • For everything else, please email <EMAIL> o Questions about exams or exam grades. o Absences or exam make up requests Course Grading Nutrition 130 Grading follows University of Massachusetts grading guidelines: Grading Details (subject to change)  4 Exams  36%  Lecture iClicker Questions  12%  In-class writing (must be completed online on day topic is introduced in lecture)  8%  Discussion attendance and participation  10%  Discussion Activities: CHO Calculation Lipid AssignmentMacronutrient Analysis Micronutrient Analysis Hidden Salt Kcal Eating outEating Cues  11%  The Following homework assignments are also reviewed in discussion (before they are due on Moodle – so you can edit them)and are worth a higher percent of your final grade:  Food Intake Analysis  6%  Diet Modification (includes individual and group work)  6%  Website Review Assignment  6%  News Article  5%  Homework Total  23%  Total  100%  Extra Credit Opportunities (for a maximum of 5 credits)  Opportunity  # of extra credit points  Grocery Store Tour  2 extra credit points  Nutrition Counseling Volunteer  1 credit per time  Extra Credit Responses to Reading posted on Moodle  0.25 points for each Questionnaire  Discussion Extra Credit  2 at the discretion of your TA  A  93%  C+  77%  A. 90%  C  73%  B+  87%  C. 70%  B. 80%  D  60%  NOTE: There will be no changes to your grade once the final grades are posted. This is only fair to the graduate students who need to do the grading. They also have finals! Exams. (36%)Nutrition 130 has four exams, each exam worth 8% towards final grade. Exams are not cumulative, including the last exam. You do not have a final exam in this class. Each exam has 40-50 multiple choice and true/false questions. Each exam also has a preparatory quiz available on Moodle which you can take for extra credit. The purpose of the preparatory quizzes is to prepare you for the exams. Exam prep quiz grades are not part of your final grade. Exams are open for 24 hours starting at 6am the day of the exam listed in the syllabus and closing at 6am the next day. You will have 75 minutes to take each exam. Exam Policies • All exams are online. This worked so well during COVID, that I decided to make it a permanent change. • Students with disabilities who need extra time who have an accommodation from disability services should make sure that we have a copy of their need for extra time.  We look over these carefully to make sure that we can meet your needs. • Make-up examinations will be scheduled for those students presenting a valid excuse for missing the examination (as outlined in “Academic Regulations” https://www.umass.edu/registrar/sites/default/files/academicregs.pdf • We will make every accommodation possible. You can send me an email before the exam for a conflict requiring you to miss the exam. • Students requesting a make-up exam after the actual exam will be subject to a 20% grade penalty unless they can provide an excuse for missing the exam. To be fair to the other students in the class, we ask that you provide a medical note or other proof of conflict. iClicker Questions (12%) Each lecture topic will be followed by some I clicker questions. You can drop dropping the lowest eight iClicker scores. We do not use the iClicker phone App because there have been significant technical difficulties with it in the past. In-class Writing (8%)Most, but not all, weeks will have an in-class writing prompt. These will ask you to reflect on information presented in the lecture and ask you to consider an implication or analysis based on this information. The questions are meant to have to think at a high level of learning (as discussed in my first lecture). These questions must be completed on the day that I present the topic in lecture. The analysis required to answer these questions will not be on the exam. We will drop the lowest two scores. Homework: These are due, completed, in discussion per the Weekly Schedule. You need to bring your Homework Assignment to your discussion where you will discuss and make improvements to your work. It is my philosophy that students learn by making mistakes and then correcting them. Food Intake Analysis (6%)There are two parts to this assignment: 1. For two days (one weekday and one weekend day) you will record what you eat, keeping track of time and your hunger and fullness as well as other influences on your eating before and after the meal on a Food/Eating Log. You will also break each food down into the components described by the dietary guidelines. 2. You will do an analysis of your food intake (as recorded in your Food/Eating Log) using Chronometer (a free website)When you bring your completed Food Intake Analysis to discussion, your TA will guide you so that you can correct any errors. It is important that you are as accurate as possible when completing this Homework assignment, because there are a number of discussion activities that use your completed Food Intake Analysis. Diet Modification Project (6%) You will use Chronometer to adjust the food intake of a very imperfect intake to become more nutritionally adequate using guidelines outlined in the directions. This assignment has an independent component and a group component. Website analysis (6%) In this assignment you will apply the CRAPP test to websites with a nutrition focus. Newspaper Article (5%) In this assignment you will compare a news article with an original research article and answer questions. Please note LATE POLICY: We allow for late submissions, however, there is a 10% deduction for every day it is late. We will accept homework up to 5 days past the due date. Discussion participation (10%) Many students fail this class because they do not go to discussion. The total points for discussion attendance, and homework (which is a part of the discussion grade) is 45%. Discussion is where “the rubber hits the road” in terms of nutrition. I can teach you all I want about macronutrients and micronutrients but if you cannot connect these nutrients to the foods you cook and eat as well as what is available in restaurants you are only getting half the story.  This is why the discussion grade is so high. Students are expected to attend all discussion meetings. It is where students apply what they are learning in class and engage with other students in discussions of this application. This is what you will remember 5 years from now. Here is a breakdown of what students will accomplish in their discussions: 1. Complete discussion activities that link the lectures to your own diet and the food environment. 2. Review assignments, discuss with other students and have the opportunity to correct mistakes or omissions before uploading it to Moodle for grading. 3. Work with your classmates to complete a group assignment that corrects nutritional deficiencies 4. Have your questions on lecture material answered. You will be able to drop the lowest two discussion participation scores. Sick policy for discussion: you must emailyour TA BEFORE the discussion if you are sick with no medical note. There is a maximum of two sick absences for which you will get credit – these count as your lowest two scores. Discussion Activities (11%) Completion of these takes place during discussion and are uploaded to Moodle. Topics include: Sugar label Calculation Kcal Eating outLipid AssignmentMacronutrient Analysis Micronutrient Analysis Hidden Salt Eating CuesYou may drop the lowest two scores Extra Credit Students can earn up to 5 extra credits.  If you earn more than that you will still only be able to count five.  The opportunities for extra credit are listed below: 1. Grocery Store Tours (2 credits)Students can attend up to two extra-credits by attending a grocery store tour at Big Y. These are available weekly and the sign up is listed on Moodle. They can be quite booked at the end of the semester so don’t wait until the last minute to sign up. 2. Discussion Extra Credit (2 credits) 3. Extra Credit Responses (0.25 of an extra credit point for each completed questionnaire.) Discussion you can earn up to two extra-credits in discussion (applies to total grade). Criteria for earning the discussion extra credit will be established by your TA. There will be nine reading questionnaires. These questionnaires are based on topic readings or videos located on Moodle. To earn full credit on the Video/Reading Questionnaires the writer must provide a thoughtful and accurate answer to the question posed in the questionnaire or defend an opinion accurately using information from the reading. 4. Nutrition Counseling Volunteer (1 credit per time) Nutrition Counseling students need you for role-play practices.  Please see details on Moodle. Grade Concerns Homework grades are visible on Moodle. It is the student’s responsibility to check this and let us know, during the open period, if there is a problem with the homework. All grades will be posted on Moodle within one week of due day. Problems or concerns with a specific grade must be raised in a timely manner (contact your discussion TA within one week of the posting of the grade in question). After a grade has been reported and unchallenged for one week, it will be considered closed. Course Policies Academic Honesty Since the integrity of the academic enterprise of any institution of higher education requires honesty in scholarship and research, academic honesty is required of all students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Academic dishonesty is prohibited in all programs of the University. Academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to: cheating, fabrication, plagiarism, and facilitating dishonesty. Appropriate sanctions may be imposed on any student who has committed an act of academic dishonesty. Instructors should take reasonable steps to address academic misconduct. Any person who has reason to believe that a student has committed academic dishonesty should bring such information to the attention of the appropriate course instructor as soon as possible. Instances of academic dishonesty not related to a specific course should be brought to the attention of the appropriate department Head or Chair. Since students are expected to be familiar with this policy and the commonly accepted standards of academic integrity, ignorance of such standards is not normally sufficient evidence of lack of intent (http://www.umass.edu/dean_students/codeofconduct/acadhonesty/). Accommodation Statement The University of Massachusetts Amherst is committed to providing an equal educational opportunity for all students. If you have a documented physical, psychological, or learning disability on file with Disability Services (DS), you may be eligible for reasonable academic accommodations to help you succeed in this course. If you have a documented disability that requires an accommodation, please notify me within the first two weeks of the semester so that we may make appropriate arrangements. Diversity and Inclusion It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well-served by this course, that students'learning needs be addressed both in and out of class, and that the diversity that the students bring to this class be viewedas a resource, strength and benefit. It is my intent to present materials and activities that are respectful of diversity: gender identity, sexuality, disability, age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, race, nationality, religion, and culture. Your suggestions are encouraged and appreciated. Please let me know ways to improve the effectiveness of the course for you personally, or for other students or student groups. I have had constructive feedback from students in the past and I am grateful to those students. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 that prohibits gender-based discrimination in educational settings that receive federal funds, the University of Massachusetts Amherst is committed to providing a safe learning environment for all students, free from all forms of discrimination, including sexual assault, sexual harassment, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and retaliation. This includes interactions in person or online through digital platforms and social media. Title IX also protects against discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, or related conditions, including recovery. There are resources here on campus to support you. A summary of the available Title IX resources (confidential and non-confidential) can be found at the following link: https://www.umass.edu/titleix/resources. You do not need to make a formal report to access them. If you need immediate support, you are not alone. Free and confidential support is available 24 hours a day / 7 days a week / 365 days a year at the SASA Hotline <PHONE>. For purposes of Title IX reporting, I am a considered a “responsible employee” at UMass (https://www.umass.edu/titleix/about). That means that if you tell me about a situation involving sexual assault, sexual harassment, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and retaliation, I must share that information with the Title IX Coordinator. Making a report to the Title IX Coordinator is my legal obligation, meets the University's goal of providing members of our community with supportive resources they might need, and enables the University to obtain a more accurate picture of the extent of sexual violence in our community. It will be completely up to you to determine if and how you want to work with the Title IX Coordinator's office. You will not be in trouble for reporting to me that you have experienced any of these situations, and the law prohibits retaliation against anyone who participates in a Title IX process. The Gen Ed Purpose Statement below was developed by the University of Massachusetts General Education Task Force. The General Education Curriculum engages students in Opportunities to develop and practice skills of critical thinking, reasoning and communication including:  Nutrition 130 Achievement and Objectives By the end of this course you will have:  Overall Ged Ed Objectives  The application and integration  Applied mathematical calculations related to the field of nutrition.  of scientific methods to real  Investigated and critically evaluated health-related websites.  world problems and contexts.  Evaluated and reflected upon the nutritional quality of your diet using 3-day diet . records and an online nutrition analysis program.Analyzed and reported on problem-solving case studies related to disease states and nutrient deficiencies in both communities and individual diets. . Investigated food labels to identify ingredients and nutritional content.Discussed the impact of public policy on food intake  Creative, analytical, quantitative, and critical thinking through .inquiry, problem solving, and synthesis. .*  . Evaluated web-based nutrition information sites for reliability and validity.Evaluated and reflected upon the nutritional quality of your diet using 3-day diet records and an online nutrition analysis program. Analyzed and reported on problem-solving case studies related to obesity and nutrient deficiencies Using restaurant nutritional analysis, case studies, food labels and peer nutritional analysis students will have analyzed and reported on problems related to fat,sucrose, Kcal and sodium.  Understanding and evaluating  Described the factors that affect your food choices and the impact on your well- the consequences of one’s  being. choices and the implications of  Evaluated and reflected upon the nutritional quality of your diet using 3-day diet  one’s actions.  records and an online nutrition analysis program. Investigated food labels from foods for nutritional quality. .Investigated, evaluated, and discussed the nutritional quality of local restaurant.  Developing information literacy *  Investigated and reported on the translation of nutrition research by the popular media. Researched and reported on peer reviewed nutrition journal articles. Used online nutritional data base to analyze your nutrient intake.  Developing technological literacy.*  . Critically evaluated selected Nutrition websites. Fundamental questions, ideas  Reviewed, questioned and discussed different definitions, theories and practices of  and methods of analysis in  human nutrition.  nutrition science.  .Reflected on the scientific method and evaluated the translation of current research in media reporting.Discussed nutrition standards and guidelines, and the science behind them. Discussed the history of nutrition discovery and the current frontiers of nutrition research.  Pluralistic perspective-taking  Described the factors that affect your food choices and compare this to the factors  and/or awareness of the  that affect other’s food choices.  relationship among culture, self  and other  Communicating persuasivelyand effectively in writing  Written in-class writing assignments on assigned readings in which the student has to defend their opinion based on information in the article.  Working effectively andcollaboratively in groups, across perspectives.  Discussed with peers their evaluation of health-related websites. .Discussed with peers their solutions to problems using food labels, restaurant menus and their own nutritional intake. In groups review case studies related disease states and nutrition deficiencies in both communities and individual diets. In these groups will work to find solutions to these deficiencies.  BS (Biological Sciences) Objectives  Know fundamental questions,ideas, and methods of inquiry/analysis used in thediscipline.  Reflected on the scientific method and discussed research in this context. Discussed the different types of research methods used in Nutrition research (observation, animal studies, molecular biology, clinical trials).  Know how individuals in the  Discussed the history of nutrition discovery and the current frontiers of nutrition  discipline view their work in  research.  relationship to both history and Read articles that show the development of research ideas and how they build on  contemporary society; previous research. Understand relevance of science  Written answers to in-class questions that require you to have an opinion and  and its impact on society.  defend it using what you have read.  Develop knowledge of thebiological sciences and the theories that have been developed to explain and understand in a coherent way the great diversity of nature.  Developed an understanding of the diversity of nutrient requirements among individuals. Will also understand the diversity in genetic risk for disease and theimpact of nutrition and lifestyle on genetic expression (nutrigenomics).  Students demonstrate capacity to do experiments, makeobservations, record facts, and evaluate and interpret data.  Interpreted information from research studies and reflected how to interpret datafrom different types of research (association vs. causation).  Students demonstrate the capacity to “think like a scientist.”  Interpreted data as presented in class in graph or table format and write the conclusions for this research during an in-class writing assignment.  Demonstrate capacity to apply Identified a nutrient deficiency in a population or individual through case study work.   disciplinary perspectives and  Also, will have created solutions to the identified problem.  methods of analysis to real world  problems (the larger society) or  other contexts.  