EdPsych 796 Spring 2023 Educational Psychology Introduction to Learning Sciences II Course Info Course Overview Expectations Instructor: <PROF_FIRST_NAME> <PROF_LAST_NAME>, Ed Sciences 1086,: <PROF_EMAIL> (office hours by appointment) Credits: 3 Canvas: <LINK_CANVAS> Instructional mode: Face-to-face Classroom: Ed Sci 304 This is the second of a two-semester course sequence that establishes the intellectual foundations for research in the learning sciences. In 795, we got to know major theoretical perspectives that are foundational for the learning sciences. In 796, we will look at how these theoretical perspectives have shaped interventions designed to help students learn, and what methods we can use to analyze learning processes to better understand by which mechanisms such interventions enhance learning. We will revisit foundational theoretical perspectives by discussing theoretical models that are more “applied” because they seek to explain how learning happens and suggest ways in which we can enhance learning. For each theoretical model, we will discuss example interventions that implement theoretical models of learning. The interventions we will discuss are only examples of many other possible interventions that use variants of the same theoretical model. Moreover, the interventions we will discuss tend to combine multiple theoretical perspectives. Therefore, we will discuss which additional theoretical models these interventions draw on and which theoretical perspectives might be useful to analyze how they foster learning. For each theoretical model, we will also discuss an example research method that is used to study learning processes fostered by interventions that make use of this theoretical model. Again, each research method that we will discuss is only an example of many other possible methods that can be used to study learning processes based on a particular theoretical model. Likewise, the same method can be used to study learning using a different theoretical lens. Therefore, we will discuss alternative research methods that can be used to study learning processes fostered by different interventions us.ing different theoretical lenses. If you are enrolled in this course for credit you are expected to complete all of the required readings, postings, class presentations, major and minor assignments, as well as attend and participate in each class. Absences require a notification, preferably by e-mail, prior to class. Late assignments must be discussed with the instructor before they are due. Explanation of Credits The credit standard for this course is met by an expectation of a total of 135 hours of student engage.ment with the courses learning activities (45 hours per credit), which include regularly scheduled instructor-student meeting times as specified in the course schedule below, reading, writing, and other student work as described in the syllabus. Required Preparation Materials All readings and videos for the course are listed in this document. Dates for completing reading assignments are listed in the Class Schedule, attached. These plans are not set in stone and may be changed if circumstances warrant. For your convenience, articles may be downloaded from the Can.vas Course Site. Class Participation in Discussions Each week, you should prepare one question you would like to discuss in class. In addition, you Syllabus, p. 1 of 9 should come to class prepared to participate in class discussions. You should study each reading and be able to share critical analyses in class. While we can expect a healthy debate on some issues, you must demonstrate respect for others with whom you disagree. We also ask that you monitor your own level of class contribution and allow space for others to contribute to the class discourse. We will actively monitor this as well and may ask those who tend to speak often to refrain from dominating and allow others to contribute. File Formats for Assignments All assignments are due in PDF format by email to <PROF_EMAIL>. Use the ISLC style template that is provided in the Capstone Assignment Information folder on Canvas. Adhere to the 8-page limit for the final deliverable. For all specifications not included in the style template, refer to the APA style manual: http://www.apastyle.org/manual/ Assignments Extensions For all assignments, you need to negotiate with the intructor at least 48h prior to the due date if you need an extension due to unforeseable circumstances. Late submissions will be penalized by grade deduction. Weekly Assignments Summary and discussion questions By Tuesdays, 11:59pm, you have to post a brief summary of the required resources (250 words max), plus a discussion question (100 words max) about the required readings of the given week. The sum.mary should describe your own take-away from the reading. The discussion question should suggest interesting points of discussion; it should not be a factual question. For example, discussion questions may ask about how one of the readings relates to something you have read before in class or outside of class, it may propose examples from your own experiences in the world for topics discussed in the readings, it may ask about differences in viewpoints expressed by the readings, among others. Capstone Project The capstone assignment will be a pilot study for a coherent empirical research study. The study should combine at least two complementary theoretical perspectives. It should propose to test an intervention on learning outcomes and learning processes. To test the intervention, the study should use a multi-methods approach in that it combines methods that use a different unit of analysis to gain complementary insights into the mechanisms through which the intervention affects learning. The study can build on the projects from 795, but it does not have to. The deliverables will be done individually. However, one week prior to the deadline for each deliv.erable, you will share your write-up with a partner from whom you will receive feedback. You are encouraged to implement the feedback in your assignment prior to submission. The final deliverable will be a paper in the format used for the ISLS conferences. Use the ISLS style template that is provided in the Capstone Assignment Information folder on Canvas and adhere to the 8-page limit, including tables, figures, and references. 1. Abstract, Introduction, and Literature Review (2-3 pages) The introduction of the proposal should describe which theoretical perspectives you chose to focus on, how they complement one another, and what open research questions follow from combining these theoretical perspectives. Specific assignment details and grading rubric can be found in the Capstone Assignment Information folder on Canvas. Deadlines can be found in the course schedule below. 2. Methods (1-2 pages) In the methods section, you will describe the study design, instructional and assessment materials, as well as planned analyses for the proposed study. Update the Abstract based on your more concrete plans for the methods. Specific assignment details and grading rubric can be found in the Capstone Assignment Information folder on Canvas. Deadlines can be found in the course schedule below. 3. Results and Discussion (2-3 pages) The results section should describe results from a pilot study and anticipated results from a proposed full study. The discussion section should describe the (actual or anticipated) contributions, detailing why they are of theoretical relevance (i.e., yield novel knowledge about how people learn) and of practical relevance (i.e., allow us to better educate learners). Specific assignment details and grading rubric can be found in the Capstone Assignment Information folder on Canvas. Deadlines can be found in the course schedule below. 4. Final Write-Up (max. 8 pages) and Presentation (10 minutes + 2 minutes for questions) You will present the final version of your research project in a write-up and in class. Integrate the feedback you received on previous capstone deliverables. Specific assignment details and grading ru.bric can be found in the Capstone Assignment Information folder on Canvas. Deadlines can be found in the course schedule below. Grading Policies and Resources A detailed rubric will be posted on Canvas. Course grades will be based on student performance in the following areas:  Participation in class discussion:  10%  Participation in class activities:  10%  Summary / discussion questions:  12%  Deliverable 1 paper:  15%  Deliverable 2 paper:  10%  Deliverable 3 paper:  15%  Final deliverable paper:  20%  Final presentation:  8%  Special Arrangements Students bring to the classroom a variety of interests, backgrounds, learning strategies, and learning needs. If there are ways that the instructor can facilitate learning for you, particularly in relation to evaluation procedures, please alert me to them and I will try to accommodate your special needs. You can also contact the McBurney Disability Resource Center to learn about services available to students: http://www.mcburney.wisc.edu. If you need accommodations for instruction, assignments, or assessments in this course please let me know as soon as possible so that U can make arrangements to facilitate your participation in the course. Religious Reasonable Accommodation Every effort shall be made to reasonably and fairly deal with all students who, because of religious obligations, have conflicts with scheduled exams, assignments, or required attendance, provided ad.vance notification of the conflict is given. Whenever possible, students should notify the instructor during the first two weeks of the semester to request special accommodation. Respectful Learning Environment Courses in Educational Psychology are venues for the free, open, and respectful exchange of ideas. Class members are expected to respect others’ backgrounds and to contribute to a healthy learning environment in all course activities. Concerns in this regard should be brought to the attention of the course instructor. Graduate Minor in Educational Psychology For graduate students outside of Educational Psychology, this course could count toward require.ments for a Graduate Minor in Educational Psychology. For details on this program, speak to the course instructor or see details at: https://edpsych.education.wisc.edu/academics/graduate-minor-in.educational-psychology Please note: For this program, students must have a Minor Advisor (faculty member in Educational Psychology) and must have their program approved before they complete more than half the courses that are part of the minor. Learning Goals The Department of Educational Psychology provides Ph.D. level training in four program areas: Hu.man Development, Learning Sciences, Quantitative Methods, and School Psychology. Each student’s course of study in the Department encompasses general and area-specific requirements but is further tailored to meet the student’s individual needs and interests. Regardless of program area affiliation Syllabus, p. 3 of 9 and specific interests, a Ph.D. in Educational Psychology requires attainment of a core set of goals to ensure that students are well prepared for a career in their chosen area of concentration. Knowledge 1. Students will acquire a strong foundation in current and past theories, research findings, and methodologies in the Learning Sciences. They will use critical thinking skills to synthesize exist.ing knowledge, evaluate strengths and limitations in existing theory and research, and identify issues in need of additional inquiry—including theoretical and methodological approaches avail.able to address these issues. 2. Students will demonstrate a knowledge of and sensitivity to human diversity in terms of indi.vidual abilities and orientations and sociocultural backgrounds. Research / Evaluation 1. Students will retrieve, evaluate, and interpret Learning Sciences literature; they will use this information to develop or adapt theoretical frameworks and derive testable hypotheses or predic.tions for their own research projects. 2. Students will learn to design realistic and feasible research projects in the Learning Sciences and to prepare necessary protocols that are sensitive to the backgrounds of individuals who are the focus of their work. 3. Students will conduct independent research and analyze and interpret resulting data. Communication 1. Students will create clear and concise reports of their research projects that are appropriate to Learning Sciences audiences, which include fellow Learning Sciences scholars (via scholarly journals), practitioners (via practitioner journals or reports), and lay audiences (via online or other published reports). 2. Students will learn to communicate effectively in verbal presentations and discussions with fel.low students and Learning Sciences researchers. Ethical Conduct 1. Students will conduct their research projects in accordance with ethical standards established in educational psychology and Learning Sciences fields. Class Schedule Theme Date Introduction 1/26 Theoretical model 1  2/2  4/7  Intervention 1a  2/16  Intervention 1b  2/23  Methods 1  3/2  Theoretical model 2 3/9 Topic & Readings Week 1: Introduction & Recap Required preparation resources: Sawyer (2006a): Introduction Sawyer (2014): Introduction Recommended resources: ISLS Video Chris Hoadley Week 2: Scaffolding Required preparation resources: Reiser & Tabak (2014) Tabak & Baumgartner (2014) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Iris Tabak & Brian Reiser No class Week 3: Cognitive Tutors Required preparation resources: Koedinger & Corbett (2006) VanLehn (2011) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Vincent Aleven Week 4: Inquiry learning Required preparation resources: Cobb & McClain (2006) Linn et al. (2014) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Sadhana Puntambekar Week 5: Learning analytics and educational data mining Required preparation resources: Baker & Siemens (2014) Rau (2017) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Carolyn Rosé Week 6: Cognitive apprenticeship Required preparation resources: Collins & Kapur (2014) Collins (1991) Recommended resources: Jean Lave talk Assignments • none • Summary and discussion question • Summary and discussion question • Introduction due to partner, Thursday 11:59pm • Summary and discussion question • Introduction due to instructor, Thursday 11:59pm • Summary and discussion question • Summary and discussion question • Methods due to partner, Thursday 11:59pm 3/17 Intervention 2 3/23 Methods 2 3/30 Theoretical model 3 4/6 Intervention 3a 4/13 Intervention 3b 4/20 Intervention 3 4/27 Spring break Week 7: Problem-based learning Required preparation resources: Lu et al. (2014) Hmelo-Silver & Barrows (2006) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Cindy Hmelo-Silver Week 8: Discourse analysis Required preparation resources: Sawyer (2006b) Chiu (2008) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Ming Ming Chiu Week 9: Collaborative learning Required preparation resources: Miyake & Kirschner (2014) Dillenbourg et al. (2009) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Pierre Dillenbourg Week 10: Knowledge-building communities Required preparation resources: Scardamalia & Bereiter (2014) Bielaczyc & Collins (2005) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Jim Slotta Week 11: Game-based learning Required preparation resources: Steinkuehler & Squire (2014) Barab et al. (2010) Recommended resources: Jane McGonigal talk Week 12: Analyzing collaboration Required preparation resources: Enyedi & Stevens (2014) Koschmann (2013) Recommended resources: ISLS Video Tim Koschmann • Summary and discussion question • Methods due to instructor, Thursday 11:59pm • Summary and discussion question • Summary and discussion question • Results & discussion due to partner, Thurs.day 11:59pm • Summary and discussion question • Results & discussion due to instructor, Thursday 11:59pm • Summary and discussion question • Final paper due to partner, Thursday 11:59pm • Summary and discussion question • Final paper due to instructor, Thursday 11:59pm Conclusion  5/4  Week 13: Conclusion & presentations  • Summary and discussion question  Required preparation resources:  • Final presentations in class  Hoadley & Van Haneghan (2011)  References Baker, & Siemens. (2014). Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 253-272). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Barab, S. A., Gresalfi, M. S., & Ingram-Goble, A. (2010). Transformational play: Using games to position person, content, and context. Educational Researcher, 39(7), 525-536. Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (2005). Fostering knowledge-creating communities. InA. M. O’Donnell, C. E. Hmelo-Silver & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative learning, reasoning, and technology (pp. 37.60). Maywah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Chiu. (2008). Flowing toward correct contributions during group problem solving: A statistical dis.course analysis. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(3). Cobb, & McClain. (2006). Guiding Inquiry-Based Math Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cam.bridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (1 ed., pp. 171-186). New York, NY: Cambridge Univer.sity Press. Collins. (1991). Cognitive Apprenticeship: Making Thinking Visible. American Educator. Collins, & Kapur. (2014). Cognitive Apprenticeship. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Hand.book of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 109-127). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer. (2009). The Evolution of Research on Computer-Supported Col.laborative Learning. Enyedi, & Stevens. (2014). Analyzing Collaboration. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Hand.book of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 191-212). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Barrows, H. S. (2006). Goals and strategies of a problem-based learning facilita.tor. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-based Learning 1(1), 21-39. Hoadley, & Van Haneghan. (2011). The Learning Sciences: Where they came from and what it means for instructional designers. In R. A. Reiser & J. V. Dempsey (Eds.), Trends and Issues in Instructional Design and Technology (3 ed., pp. 53-63). New York: Pearson. Koedinger, & Corbett. (2006). Cognitive Tutors: Technology Bringing Learning Sciences to the Classroom. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (1 ed., pp. 61-77). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Koschmann. (2013). Conversation Analysis and Collaborative Learning. In C. Hmelo-Silver, C. Chinn, C. Chan & A. O’Donnell (Eds.), International Handbook of Collaborative Learning (pp. 149.167). New York: Routledge. Linn, Eylon, Rafferty, & Vitale. (2014). Designing Instruction to Improve Lifelong Inquiry Learning. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education. Lu, Bridges, & Hmelo-Silver. (2014). Problem-Based Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cam.bridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 298-318). New York, NY: Cambridge Univer.sity Press. Miyake, & Kirschner. (2014). The Social and Interactive Dimensions of Collaborative Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 418-438). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Rau, M. A. (2016). Pattern mining uncovers social triggers of conceptual learning with physical and virtual representation In S. Barnes, M. Chi, & M. Feng (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (pp. 478-483). Raleigh, NC: International Educational Data Mining Society. Reiser, & Tabak. (2014). Scaffolding. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learn.ing Sciences (2 ed., pp. 44-62). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Rosé, Wang, Cui, Arguello, Stegmann, Weinberger, & Fischer. (2008). Analyzing collaborative learn.ing processes automatically: Exploiting the advances of computational linguistics in computer-sup.ported collaborative learning. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 237–271. Sawyer. (2006a). Analyzing Collaborative Discourse. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Hand.book of the Learning Sciences (1 ed., pp. 187-204). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Sawyer. (2006b). Introduction: The New Science of Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of The Learning Sciences (pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Sawyer. (2014). Introduction: The New Science of Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 1-18). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Scardamalia, & Bereiter. (2014). Knowledge Building and Knowledge Creation: Theory, Pedagogy, and Technology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 397-417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Steinkuehler, & Squire. (2014). Videogames and Learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2 ed., pp. 377-394). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Tabak, & Baumgartner. (2004). The Teacher as Partner: Exploring Participant Structures, Symmetry, and Identity Work in Scaffolding. Cognition & Insruction, 22(4), 393-429. VanLehn. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems and other tutoring systems. Educational Psychologist, 46(4), 197-221. doi: 10.1080/00461520.2011.611369 ISLS Video Chris Hoadley – Introduction Session: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all-webinars/ Videos hoadley_video/index.html ISLS Video Iris Tabak & Brian Reiser – Scaffolding: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all-webinars/ tabak_reiser_all/index.html ISLS Video Vincent Aleven – Cognitive Tutors: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all-webinars/alev.en/index.html ISLS Video Sadhana Puntambekar: Distributed Scaffolding – Interplay of the teacher, peers, curricu.lum and text in the classroom: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all-webinars/puntambekar2/index. html ISLS Video Carolyn Rosé – Learning analytics and educational data mining: http://isls-naples.psy. lmu.de/intro/all-webinars/rose_all/index.html Jean Lave -An Apprenticeship in Critical Ethnographic Practice: http://vimeo.com/28855105 ISLS Video Cindy Hmelo-Silver – Problem-based learning: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all.webinars/hmelo-silver/index.html ISLS Video Ming Ming Chiu – Statistical discourse analysis: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all.webinars/chiu/index.html ISLS Video Pierre Dillenbourg – Introduction to CSCL Research: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/ all-webinars/dillenbourg_video/index.html ISLS Video Jim Slotta – Knowledge building and communities of learners: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu. de/intro/all-webinars/slotta_video/index.html Jane McGonigal -Gaming can make a better world: http://www.ted.com/talks/jane_mcgonigal_gam.ing_can_make_a_better_world?language=en ISLS Video Tim Koschmann – Conversation and interaction analysis / ethnomethodological ap.proaches: http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/intro/all-webinars/koschmann_all/index.html 