Welcome to CS 568 2021 FALL! The reading for this year will be posted <LINK>. <LINK> is the list of 2016 readings But to give you a sense of the reading, take a look at this from 2014 <LINK>. You can even go back to the reading from the 2011 class <LINK_DESCRIPTOR> CLASS: Students will learn how to enable educational technology to adapt to the user and about typical architectures used by existing intelligent tutoring systems for adapting to users. Students will see applications of decision theoretic systems, reinforcement learning, Markov models for action selection, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) planning. Students will read papers that apply AI techniques for the purpose of adapting to users. Students will complete a project that applies these techniques to build an adaptive educational system. (Prerequisites: CS 534 Artificial Intelligence or permission of the instructor.) ROOM: OH 218 Students are required to attend class. If you can’t make it, please send me email. If you miss more than two classes, your grade will be dropped by a letter grade. If you miss more than four classes, it will go down two grades, etc. INSTRUCTOR: Prof. <PROF_FIRST_NAME> <PROF_LAST_NAME> <PROF_EMAIL> Office: FL 237 Phone Number: <PHONE> Office Hours: By appointment . If you plan to come to office hours, send me some email letting me knowing you are coming and I make sure I am there, otherwise I might think no one is coming to office hours. I check email once a day, so don’t expect an instantaneous response a few hours before a program is due. Other speakers will occasionally be invited to lecture to the class. TEXTBOOK/READINGS: There is a packet of required reading that you will be required to purchase that pays for the photocopying. Reading for the first class will be distributed the first day of class. Many of the papers are available online. You are expected to print your own copy and bring it to class for discussion. GRADES: Exams may include multiple choice, short answer, short essay, analysis, and programming. Exams will be based upon the readings and material presented in class. Grading Areas  Percent of  Final Grade  Project  40%  Exam  30%  Reading Report  30%  & Class  Participation*  Total Points  100%  *Note, 5% of your course grade will be based on the instructor's’ judgment of your level of learning , whether you have learned more or less than is reflected in the points you have earned. This judgment will be influenced by your class and group participation. Thus, regular attendance and active participation in group and class meetings is in your interest. Converting group grades to individual grades Group homework grades are closely tied to individual grade. For example, if the group grade is 25 points, each individual member is likely to receive 25 points. However, to avoid rewarding free riding, distinctions will be made among individuals. We will not have adequate personal information to distinguish among group members for group work. Therefore in assigning individual grades, private evaluations from all group members will be solicited at the end of the course. These evaluations will take the form of a questionnaire asking each group member to allocate, among 100% of the total effort, the responsibility among the members for the group's homework assignments. Homework The homeworks are designed for your learning. Some homeworks will be just written, while most will have some programming component. Not all assignments will be worth the same amount. More detailed descriptions of the assignments will be posted to the course webpage at the appropriate times during the semester. Unannounced pop quizzes will be given on the reading. Please do the reading. READINGS: This class is a upper level graduate seminar to prepare you to make a scientific contribution to the intelligent tutoring research community. As such, you will be required to read a great deal of material to give you the needed background. The paper are release one week ahead of time. Students will be required to submit at a response within 48 hours. You then must go and read with your peers have said and make a second post within 48 hours have that. So everyone will have posted three days before class. Then just before class, you should post one more time. So this a total of three posts. These posts can be about 1) a question you had about the reading, something important you did not understand 2) an idea inspired by the reading 3) an interesting connection with something you learned or did previously in this or another course, or in other professional work or research 4) an on-topic, relevant response, clarification, or further comment on another student’s post You are required to review other students’ post and are encouraged to respond to/ answer other student’s discussions. I will use these questions as starting points for discussion. In class, students will be randomly selected to answers others students questions and or asked to summarize a paper. If you have not done the reading you should email me privately ahead of time to avoid being put on the spot and making a fool of yourself. The course discussion group can be found on a Canvas 