1/27/23 Management 462: Social Entrepreneurship Professor <PROF_FIRST_NAME> <PROF_LAST_NAME> Management Department • University of Massachusetts Amherst Spring 2023 Instructor Professor <PROF_FIRST_NAME> <PROF_LAST_NAME> <PROF_EMAIL> Class Time: Mon & Wed, 12:20pm-1:10pm Class Location: ISOM Room 125 Instructor Office Hours: After class or by appointment in Crotty Hall 304 or on Zoom Course Information: Social entrepreneurship involves using the skills and strategies of business to innovatively and sustainably solve social, environmental, and economic problems. Social entrepreneurs often work in challenging environments and address societal issues where traditional government interventions or market forces have failed. We will discuss these issues and innovative solutions that existing social enterprises have developed by drawing on real-life examples. One of the goals of this course is to provide students with an overview of the social entrepreneurship process. Drawing on many tools that traditional entrepreneurs employ to design their organizations, we will use them in the context of social ventures and focus on social value creation and scaling up social impact. In the course of the semester, students will work in groups to develop a feasibility study of a real social enterprise. As a result, this course will help students identify and create business opportunities that have positive social impacts. Objectives. Develop knowledge of the social entrepreneurship process. . Explore major social entrepreneurship business models, funding arrangements, and theories actively discussed by practitioners, policymakers, and scholars. . Examine the challenges faced by social entrepreneurs and critically evaluate the solutions they develop. . Apply the materials we cover in class to develop an investment pitch and a pitch deck for a hypothetical social entrepreneurship idea. . Learn to efficiently search databases and apply tools available in the open access and through UMass library to retrieve information relevant to social entrepreneurship initiatives. . Practice to systematically synthesize information from various sources and effectively communicate the results of analyses. Expected Learning OutcomesBy the end of the course, students should be able to identify and map out a social problem of interest, design a slide deck for a pitch of a potential social venture, and be able to carry out due diligence of a proposed social venture. Required Materials Electronic Coursepack: This contains Harvard Business Publishing cases and needs to be purchased and accessed at <LINK_HARVARD_HBSP>. (Note that you will have to register for an account. If you cannot access the coursepack materials by following the link, please get in touch with Harvard Business Publishing technical support and let me know if they cannot resolve your issue). TopHat account: We will be using Top Hat Pro (<LINK_TOPHAT>) for class participation. You will be able to submit answers to in-class questions using Apple or Android smartphones and tablets, laptops, or through text message. For instructions on how to create a Top Hat account and enroll in our Top Hat Pro course, please refer to the Top Hat’s Getting Started Guide (<LINK_TOPHAT>). If you already have a Top Hat account, go to <LINK_TOPHAT> to be taken directly to our course. If you are new to Top Hat, follow the link in the email invitation you received or: – Go to <LINK_TOPHAT> – Click “Search by school” and input University of Massachusetts -Amherst – Search for our course with the following join code: <CODE> Other required readings:We will read selected chapters from the following books available through the UMass library. Note: you will need to log in using your UMass NetID. . Chahine, T. (2016). Introduction to Social Entrepreneurship (1st ed.). CRC Press. Available via UMass library at the following link: https://doi.org.silk.library.umass.edu/10.1201/b19475. . Seelos, C. & Mair, J. (2017). Innovation and scaling for impact: How effective social enterprises do it. Stanford University Press. Available via UMass library at the following link: https://ebookcentral-proquest.com.silk.library.umass.edu/lib/uma/detail.action?docID=4740711. . Kickul, J., & Lyons, T.S. (2012). Understanding Social Entrepreneurship: The Relentless Pursuit of Mission in an Ever Changing World. Taylor & Francis Group. Available via UMass library at the following link: https://ebookcentral-proquest-com.silk.library.umass.edu/lib/uma/detail.action?docID=957562. . We will be reading some articles from the New York Times; to register for a free academic account, go to www.nytimes.com/passes. Course Delivery & Technology: This course will be in person. Our Blackboard site is the central hub for this course. There you will find items such as the syllabus, announcements, readings, problem sets and other relevant course information and materials. Please visit Blackboard often to access additional readings or materials for the course and to post questions or discuss topics with the class. Course policies: Electronic devices: The use of cell phones or other communication devices is disruptive in class. If you have an emergency, please excuse yourself quietly. Students are permitted to use computers and tablets during class for note taking and other class-related work only. Recording of lectures is prohibited unless arranged in advance with me. Special accommodations: If you are a student with a documented disability on record at UMass and wish to have a reasonable accommodation made for you in this class, please notify me within the first two weeks of the semester so that we may make appropriate arrangements. Academic honesty: You are expected to be familiar with and to follow the University’s policies on academic integrity (see http://www.umass.edu/ombuds/honesty.php/). Instances of alleged dishonesty will be forwarded to the Academic Honesty Board. If you have any questions about my expectations, please ask. Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated. Please read about the following specific situations: . Use of plagiarism detection tools like Turnitin, SafeAssign, etc. Please note that in line with the UMass Academic Honesty Policy when submitting your own or team paper, you may want to use a plagiarism detection tool. Your instructor will likely use one of these tools to check for plagiarism. . Use of generative artificial intelligence (AI) technologies like ChatGPT. AI-enabled technologies are not a replacement for your own original ideas, critical thinking, and effort in your work on the writing assignments. You should in general not use a generative AI tool to aid you in your work on any written assignment unless it is explicitly stated in the assignment that you can do so. Failure to do so will be considered “academic dishonesty.” If you have questions about what is and is not permitted with respect to using AI in our assignments, please reach out to me. . No use of TopHat attendance code when absent from class / No sharing your TopHat attendance code with those absent from class. We use TopHat to facilitate class engagement and also help record attendance. I will also sometimes take attendance by hand. If I discover that a student was absent from class on a given day but entered the TopHat code for that session, I will consider it “academic dishonesty”. If I discover that a student present in class shared a TopHat code for a given session with another student who was absent, I will consider it “facilitation of academic dishonesty”. Expected class behavior: You are expected to be respectful towards your fellow students and teaching staff. Any disruptive behavior or incidents of classroom incivility will be dealt with according to the Guidelines for Classroom Civility and Respect provided by the UMass Amherst Dean of Students Office. Special accommodations: If you are a student with a documented disability on record at UMass and wish to have a reasonable accommodation made for you in this class, please notify me within the first two weeks of the semester so that we may make appropriate arrangements. Teamwork: Teamwork is an important element of this course. Working on joint projects and class activities is designed to help you experience group collaboration, participatory decision-making, and team leadership, the skills valued in the current labor market. If your team is experiencing a problem like free-riding by some team members, first try to work it out on your own. It is of utmost importance to maintain the collegial communication and respect towards each of the team members when discussing any challenges. If the problem remains, please get in touch with me as early as possible. Extra credit opportunities. There may be opportunities for extra credit for participating in management-related research. I will announce these opportunities in class and via BBL. However, this is not guaranteed as it is dependent on current research needs of Isenberg faculty. If there is an extra credit opportunity, one can expect to earn up to 2% towards the total course grade. Please note that participation in extra credit opportunities is entirely voluntary. Choosing not to participate in extra credit research will NOT have any negative impact on your course grade. Course requirements:Students will be evaluated on the basis of class participation, weekly discussion prompts on BBL, 2 individual and 2 group assignments, and 2 midterm exams. Class participation/attendance  10%  Weekly Discussion Posts on BBL  10%  Social Entrepreneur Profile  10%  Social Venture Profile  10%  Midterm Exam 1  20%  Midterm Exam 2  20%  Team: Social Venture Assessment Report  15%  Team: Social Venture Pitch  5%  Grades will be assigned according to the following expected cutoffs with no rounding; however, exam grades may be curved at the discretion of the instructor if performance deviates significantly from the norm: 93 (A), 90 (A-), 87 (B+), 83 (B), 80 (B-), 77 (C+), 73 (C), 70 (C-), 60 (D+), 50 (D), below 50 (F). Class attendance/participation: We will be using TopHat for attendance and participation. See instructions above for how to get an account. It is essential that you have done the readings before class and are prepared to actively participate in class discussions. You will be graded on the quality, not quantity, of your comments and your ability to respectfully engage your fellow students. If you feel ill, please do not come to class! You can get full participation credit even if you miss classes due to illness (contact me). Weekly Discussion Questions on BBL: By each Friday morning, I will post a discussion question on BBL based on the material covered in class that week. Students should briefly respond to the question by the following Monday by class time (12:20pm) on BBL. These are expected to be short (1-2 paragraphs) and should take 10-15 minutes to complete. There will be at least 10 total discussion questions and you can miss up to 3 posts and still get full credit (i.e. 7 total). Assignments: There will be 2 individual assignments and 2 group assignments: (1) Social entrepreneur profile You will research and collect information about a social entrepreneur whose work you find exciting and inspiring. I will post a guide on BBL on what needs to be included in the write-up and the expected formatting. The assignment should be a maximum of two pages long, not counting a list of references. There will be an “Assignment” link posted in the BBL folder for the date when it is due. (2) Social venture profile Similar to the “Social entrepreneur profile” assignment, you will conduct background research and summarize information about a social venture of your choice. All requirements regarding what information needs to be included and the expected format will be in a guide posted on BBL. The expected length of your submission is a maximum of two pages long, not counting a list of references. There will be an “Assignment” link posted in the BBL folder for the date when it is due. (3) Social venture assessment report (group project) Each student will be assigned to a team that will take on the role of a budding social entrepreneur. The team will undertake a comprehensive assessment of a social venture preparing to pitch their venture idea to a potential social impact investor. In their assessment, the team follows the social entrepreneurship process we cover in the course. Each of the sections of the report corresponds to a content module we cover this semester. Like in some other courses you may have taken during your Isenberg experience, you are encouraged to participate in social venture idea / entrepreneurship competitions, such as Hult Prize or applying to an event like Collegiate Summer Venture program, which is jointly organized by the Valley Venture Mentors and Berthiaume Center for Entrepreneurship (UMass). (4) Social venture idea pitch (group project) Teams will present their findings from the Social venture assessment report. The length of the pitch should be 5 minutes maximum. I will post a separate guide for this assignment with details about the requirements and expectations for presentations on BBL. Everyone will have to submit evaluations of other teams’ presentations and fill out an online 5-question assessment form. This will count as participation for the day of the presentations. Exams: There will be two midterm exams. Some concepts and frameworks from the 1st half of the semester may also be included in Exam 2 since they are relevant for the topics we will cover in the 2nd half of the semester. Please note that absence from an exam will be excused ONLY for a serious illness or family emergency that is appropriately documented; otherwise a grade of zero will be assigned. There are NO EXCEPTIONS to this rule. To prepare for the exams, please review the relevant readings, instructor slides, and class notes. There are no make-up exams, and an unexcused failure to complete the exam on the day dedicated in the course schedule will result in 0 points earned for the given exam. Important DatesMonday, February 13 Last day to add or drop any class with no record Monday, February 20 No class (President’s Day) Monday, March 13 No class (Spring recess) Wednesday, March 15 No class (Spring recess) Monday, March 20 Social Entrepreneur Profile due/No in-class meeting Monday, March 27 Midterm Examination 1 Monday, April 10 Last day to Drop with ‘W’ and select 'P/F' Monday, April 16 No class (Patriot’s Day) Monday, April 24 Social Venture Profile due Monday, May 3 Midterm Examination 2 Wednesday, May 17 Last day of classes Wednesday, May 24 Group Social Venture Assessment Report Due Course Outline and Assigned Readings Class  Date  Topic  Required Readings & Videos*  1  Mon, 2/6  Introduction  Syllabus  2  Wed, 2/8  What is Social Entrepreneurship? Definitions and main  (1) Chahine: Chapter 1 (2) Kickul & Lyons: Chapter 2 (optional) and 3  concepts.  3  Mon, 2/13  Social problem identification: Addressing “Wicked problems” in social entrepreneurship. Inverted Ishikawa Diagram team-based activity.  (1) Chahine: Chapter 2 (2) Video: “Deconstructing Problems”, by Matt Andrews  4  Wed, 2/15  Social problem identification: Problem space mapping  (1) Seelos & Mair: “Mapping Problem Spaces” (2) “Business Schools with a Social Appeal”, NYT, 2011.  5  Wed, 2/22  Social problem identification: Problem space mapping continued  (1) Seelos & Mair: “Mapping Problem Spaces” (2) Mapping problem spaces activity  6  Mon, 2/27  Social Mission I: Guest Speaker Seth Diemond  (1) The Girls Basketball Academy for Leadership and Life  7  Wed, 3/1  Social Mission II: Case Discussion  (1) CASE: “Homeless World Cup” (Course Pack) (2) Homeless World Cup website  8  Mon, 3/6  Social Innovation & scaling social impact  (1) Seelos & Mair: “Intro: Social Enterprises Require a Distinctive Perspective on Innovation and Scaling”. (2) List: Why It’s So Hard to Scale a Great Idea.  9  Wed, 3/8  Social Innovation: Innovation IQ Ideation exercise.  10  Mon, 3/20  *Use class time to work individually on “Social Entrepreneur Profile”  *SUBMIT Social Entrepreneur Profile by 5pm ET  11  Wed, 3/22  Social Innovation: Continue Innovation IQ Ideation exercise.  12  Mon, 3/27  MIDTERM EXAM 1  13  Wed, 3/29  Applying the Lean Start-up methodology to a social enterprise: Business  (1) Osterwalder & Pigneur: “Definition of a Business Model Canvas” and “The 9 Building Blocks”. (2) Mollick: What the Lean Startup  Model Canvas  Method Gets Right and Wrong.  14  Mon, 4/3  Applying the Lean Start-up methodology to a social enterprise: Exercise  (1) Building Blocks of the Business Model Canvas (2) Fill out final team project preference form  15  Wed, 4/5  Funding mechanisms for social ventures: Guest speaker Dr. Ruchir Agarwal  Agarwal and Gopinath: Seven finance and trade lessons from Covid-19 for future pandemics  16  Mon, 4/10  Funding mechanisms for social ventures I  (1) CASE “Goldman Sachs (A): Determining the Potential of Social Impact Bonds”. (Course Pack)  17  Wed, 4/12  Funding mechanisms for social ventures II & Support systems for social entrepreneurs.  (1)  Chahine: Chapter 9. Pitching and Networking, Chapter 10. Funding Your Venture (2) Hathaway: What Startup Accelerators Really Do, PDF (3) MassChallenge Blog. Accelerators Vs Incubators: How to Choose the Right One.  18  Wed, 4/19  Organizational design in social entrepreneurship I  (1) CASE: “Arlan Hamilton and Backstage Capital” (Course Pack)  19  Mon, 4/24  Organizational design in social entrepreneurship II  *SUBMIT Social Venture Profile by 5pm ET (1) Chahine: Chapter 11. Building the Organization (2) Katila & Leatherbee: To Make Lean Startups Work, You Need a Balanced Team, PDF.  20  Wed, 4/26  Social impact and measurement. Creating a logframe and an impact measurement system.  (1) Chahine: Chapter 7. Measuring Impact. (2) Rangan & Gregg: How Social Entrepreneurs Zig-Zag Their Way to Impact at Scale.  21  Mon, 5/1  Social impact and measurement II  (1) Reynolds, et al:  “A Playbook for Designing Social Impact Measurement,” SSIR. (2) Seelos & Mair: Ch. 1, “How Innovation and Scaling Create Impact”  22  Wed, 5/3  MIDTERM EXAM 2  23  Mon, 5/8  Social Venture Idea Project Workshop: Work in teams in class to finalize social idea pitches  24  Wed, 5/10  Team Pitch Presentations  25  Mon, 5/15  Team Pitch Presentations  26  Wed, 5/17  Team Pitch Presentations & Course wrap-up  *SUBMIT Team Social Venture Assessment Reports and peer evaluations within 1 week (by May 24 5pm ET).  *Required readings and videos will be posted on BBL. 