University of Massachusetts Amherst Department of Music and Dance MUSIC-ED 500K: Student Teaching Section N-9 (Elementary) MUSIC-ED 500U: Student Teaching Special Subjects 5-12 (Secondary) Course Syllabus Spring 2023 Online via Zoom INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION <PROF_FIRST_NAME> <PROF_LAST_NAME>, Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Music Education Pronouns: he/him/his Office Hours: Thursdays, 1:00-3:00 pm, FAC 358 or <LINK_ZOOM> (please check ahead of time as some Thursdays will be only via Zoom); other days/times by appointment Email: <PROF_EMAIL> <TA_FIRST_NAME> <TA_LAST_NAME>, M.M. Ph.D. student and Graduate Teaching Associate Pronouns: he/him/his Email: <TA_EMAIL> COURSE INFORMATION Student Teacher Seminar Meeting Time and Location Fridays, 4:30-6:00 pm <LINK_ZOOM> Seminar Meeting Dates • Friday, February 10 • Friday, February 17 • Friday, March 3 • Friday, March 24 • Friday, March 31 • Friday, April 14 • Friday, April 28 • Friday, May 5 • Friday, May 12 Purpose • To provide a guided and supervised opportunity for licensure candidates (student teachers) to apply their content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and pedagogical skills in a professional manner in settings that are representative of the area of licensure. • To prepare licensure candidates for the transition from pre-service to in-service PreK-12 school music educator. • To facilitate licensure candidates’ development of a professional disposition that is conducive to success in the field of PreK-12 school music education. Objectives In order to be licensable in Massachusetts, candidates must demonstrate performance at or above a grade of “C” on all standards set by the University of Massachusetts, the Department of Music and Dance, the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM), and the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE). Candidates must demonstrate the ability to: • Promote the learning and growth of all students by providing high quality and coherent instruction, designing and administering authentic and meaningful student assessments, analyzing student performance and growth data, using this data to improve instruction, providing students with constructive feedback on an ongoing basis, and continuously refining learning objectives. • Promote the learning and growth of all students through instructional practices that establish high expectations, create a safe and effective classroom environment, and demonstrate cultural proficiency. • Promote the learning and growth of all students through effective partnerships with families, caregivers, community members, and organizations. • Promote the learning and growth of all students through ethical, culturally proficient, skilled, and collaborative practice. See the Candidate Assessment of Performance (CAP) evaluation rubric (p. 18) for more detailed expectations. Required Materials • Technological device with microphone and camera that can access Zoom (https://www.umass.edu/it/zoom) and the internet. • All readings and materials will be posted on Moodle; no purchase of texts is required. • Candidate (i.e., licensure candidate) = student teacher • CAP = Candidate Assessment of Performance • DESE = Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education • Ed Prep = UMass Educator Preparation Office • FEB = Field Experience Binder (final electronic portfolio on Tk20) • Program supervisor = university supervisor • Supervising practitioner = supervising teacher Acronyms and Terms used in Student Teaching Practicum Structure To meet the DESE licensing regulations, licensure candidates must student teach at both elementary (general music only -no instrumental music) and secondary levels (includes ensembles and possibly general music or specialty courses). A minimum of 35 school days must be completed at each of the elementary (grades PreK/K-5/6) and secondary levels (including some or all of the following grades: 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12). Candidate Expectations Before your placement begins  • Discuss the goals of the placement with your supervising practitioner (including a timeline for observing, assisting, and assuming full responsibility). You must assume the full responsibility for teaching unassisted for a minimum of 50 hours per placement.  Professionalism  • Placement Attendance. You are required to be in attendance every school day and all other times your supervising practitioner is at school or supervising school activities on time, organized, prepared, professionally attired, and able to effectively perform your duties as a student teacher. You are allowed two (2) days of absences per placement for illness, weather, or family emergency. These are not personal days and may not be used for any other reasons than illness, weather, or family emergency unless special permission has been given by the Coordinator of Music Education prior to the start of your student teaching experience. Notify your supervising practitioner, program supervisor, and the Coordinator of Student Teaching in advance if an absence is necessary. Absences in excess of two (2) days must be made up by extending the respective placement. Documentation of absences may be required. An unexcused absence from a placement will cause your grade for that placement to be lowered. • Student Teacher Seminar Attendance. You are required to be in attendance on time and for the full length of  Daily instruction each student teacher seminar meeting. You may only be excused from a seminar meeting for (a) weather that interrupts your internet connection, (b) illness, (c) family emergency, or (d) a concert at your placement that you are involved in and conflicts with the seminar meeting time. Documentation of absences may be required. Absences for any other reason will be considered unexcused unless special permission has been obtained from the seminar instructor prior to the beginning of your student teaching experience. An unexcused absence from, or habitual tardiness to, student teacher seminar will cause your grade for the respective student teaching placement to be lowered. • Communication. Maintain regular and ongoing communication with your supervising practitioner, program supervisor, student teacher seminar instructor and TA, the Coordinator of Student Teaching, and the Coordinator of Music Education. Respond to email communications or texts from these individuals within 24 hours if a response is requested. • Observations. Be proactive in establishing a schedule of observations and meetings with your program supervisor and supervising practitioner. Maintain and have the CAP Form electronically signed by your program supervisor and supervising practitioner via DocuSign at the end of each placement. • Responsibility. Submit all assignments on time (in your placements and in student teacher seminar). Complete all final licensure requirements in a timely manner. • Prepare lesson plans for every full lesson taught. Utilize the music education program’s classroom or rehearsal lesson plan template for each lesson. Submit your lesson plans in advance to your supervising practitioners according to their expectations. • Conduct assessments and gather evidence that demonstrates that your students are learning. Create assessment tools appropriate to the unit/lesson/setting. • You are required to plan and teach all or as much as possible of a minimum of 1 instructional unit in your elementary placement. See the Unit Plan Requirements section beginning on page 12 for specifics. • In one placement (of your choice) and in collaboration with your supervising practitioner, design and implement a Measure of Student Learning according to DESE guidelines, including completion of the Measure of Student Learning Worksheet, Student Survey with summary and report, and Finalized Goal and Implementation Form.  Reflective practice  • Establish regular meetings with your supervising practitioner and procedures for the review of daily work, assessment, and reflection. Be sure to review your Observation Reports and Formative/Summative Assessments with your supervising practitioner.  Student teacher seminar  • Attend all student teacher seminar meetings (100% attendance is required, unless excused by the instructor in advance). • Complete and submit/present all seminar assignments on time as per course directives. Assignments include the following: o Weekly assignments such as readings, reflections, Measure of Student Learning evidence, etc. o Midpoint and final reports for each placement o Your professional resume o A sample cover letter  Licensure documentation and evidence  • Maintain your Field Experience Binder (FEB) on Tk20 to document evidence of meeting the prescribed standards. See pages 14-15 for specific requirements. • Maintain your Spring 2023 Student Teacher Hours Log and submit it via Moodle at the end of each placement with your and your respective supervising practitioner’s signatures on the accompanying signature form. • Submit your FEB on Tk20 by the end of May 23, 2023 unless you have more than 5 school days left in your placement and plan to take grades of “INC” for MUSIC.ED 500K/500U. • Via DocuSign, complete and electronically sign your CAP Form and route it to your supervising practitioner, program supervisor, and the Coordinator of Music Education as soon as your final observation is completed or no later than May 23, 2023 unless you have more than 5 school days left in your placement  and plan to take grades of “INC” for MUSIC-ED 500K/U.  Important: Please Note!  • Failure to adhere to these expectations may result in action being taken that ranges from receiving grades of “INC,” to lowering of student teaching grades, to termination of the placement with subsequent denial of recommendation for licensing.  Serving as a Substitute Teacher Candidates are generally not permitted to serve as substitute teachers. This is for the protection of both you and your students. A licensed teacher of record acceptable to the school district should serve as the official substitute if/when a supervising teacher is absent. Extensive absence by a supervising teacher should be reported to the Coordinator of Student Teaching. Student Teacher Seminar Student teacher seminar meetings are held many Fridays during the semester, depending on the schedules of student teachers and instructors. Seminars are designed to enhance the quality of your student teaching experience through mentoring, the sharing of experiences and ideas with other candidates, and preparation for seeking employment as a PreK-12 music educator. Seminar meetings will be held via Zoom. The first seminar meeting will be held on Friday, February 10 from 4:30-6:00pm. Formal Observations Candidates are formally observed by program supervisors a minimum of four times (2 observations per placement) during student teaching. The first three observations are announced and the final observation is unannounced. Observations provide opportunities for the program supervisor to gather evidence related to the candidate’s performance in the classroom. These visits are also a time for the candidate, program supervisor, and supervising practitioner to discuss the progress of the placement and address areas of concern. Typically, an observation consists of a pre-conference (goal-setting meeting: program supervisor and student teacher), observation of a class, and a three-way meeting (you, your program supervisor, and your supervising practitioner). If at all possible, please allow time for the meetings to occur when scheduling an observation. Candidate Assessment of Performance (CAP) Form The CAP form is a critical licensure document. You, your supervising practitioner, and your program supervisor must electronically sign and date this form. It must be submitted via DocuSign with electronic signatures immediately after the final observation of your second placement. This form will be discussed in detail at the first seminar meeting. The CAP evaluation rubric is provided starting on page 18, and a sample CAP form is provided starting on p. 16. These documents are also provided on Moodle. Moodle Moodle (UMass Amherst’s Learning Management System: umass.moonami.com) hosts an electronic copy of the course syllabus, course calendar, reading materials, and assignment submission boxes. Additionally, a Zoom link to our virtual seminar class is posted on Moodle. Updates and changes to the course calendar will be posted on Moodle as well. I reserve the right to alter it during the semester due to the needs of the class or other circumstances. If the academic calendar changes, a new version will be posted on Moodle. Additionally, announcement posts will be emailed to your UMass email address. Please check the Moodle site, gradebook, and your UMass email account regularly for updates. Student Teaching Portfolio All teacher preparation candidates at UMass are required to create and maintain a Field Experience Binder (FEB), which is an electronic portfolio on Tk20. The FEB documents the student teaching experience and provides a repository for evidence demonstrating accomplishment of standards. It is the final licensure portfolio. Refer to the Music FEB information on pages 14-15 for a list of evidence to be included. Participation Students will participate in full class and small group discussions via Zoom. As this class is part of the professional preparation sequence for preservice music educators, students are expected to arrive on time, bring all required materials, be prepared for all in-class assignments, have all assignments completed by the indicated due date, and participate in class discussions. Assessment and Evaluation Candidate performance is assessed in accordance with the “Objectives” and “CAP Rubric” sections of this syllabus. Assessment will be ongoing and will come from a variety of sources, including the candidate, supervising practitioner, program supervisor, Coordinator of Student Teaching, Coordinator of Music Education, and student teacher seminar instructor. The final grade is based on the complete body of evidence gathered from the above sources. When all degree program and licensure requirements have been completed satisfactorily, the Educator Licensure Officer endorses student teachers for licensure. Supervising Practitioner: Your supervising practitioner (supervising teacher) will review your work on an ongoing basis. They will provide written and verbal feedback to you throughout your placement and will help to complete observation reports and formative/summative assessments on your performance as a student teacher. These assessments become part of your Field Experience Binder on Tk20. Program Supervisor: The program supervisor (university supervisor) is the person representing UMass Amherst who is charged with observing your teaching. They are assigned by the Coordinator of Music Education. This person gathers evidence and serves as a resource and supportive observer. The program supervisor, together with the supervising practitioner, completes observation reports and formative/summative assessments, which are then posted in your Field Experience Binder on Tk20. Seminar Instructor: The student teacher seminar instructor awards the final grades for MUSIC-ED 500K/500U upon review of the evidence from the sources above, the quality and timeliness of work submitted in the student teacher seminar, and satisfactory completion of the FEB. Coordinator of Student Teaching: The Coordinator of Student Teaching is responsible for monitoring your placements, reporting your total hours spent in your student teaching experience, and evaluating your FEB. Coordinator of Music Education: The Coordinator of Music Education is responsible for verifying that you have met all music education licensure program requirements and notifying the Educator Licensure Officer that you are ready to be cleared for educator licensure in Massachusetts. Educator Licensure Officer: The Educator Licensure Officer reviews the final reports provided by the Coordinator of Music Education and checks to see that all other educator licensure requirements have been met. When all requirements have been met, she then adds a licensure statement to the transcripts of candidates and places an endorsement in their DESE Educator Licensure and Renewal (ELAR) account for an Initial Educator License in Music: All Levels. Grading Student teachers must demonstrate performance at or above a grade of “C” on all standards to pass student teaching and be recommended for licensure. Additionally, student teachers must attain minimum levels of “Proficient” in Quality and “Needs Improvement” in Scope and Consistency on all seven CAP elements in the Formative and Summative Evaluations. Furthermore, student teachers must earn a final grade of “C” or better in both placements to pass student teaching and be recommended for licensure. The final grade is based on the evidence documented from the field, CAP, and FEB. Weighting: The final grade will be tallied by weighting the evaluations of the supervising teacher, university supervisor, and seminar instructor as follows*: • Supervising Practitioner and Program Supervisor = 75% • Student Teacher Seminar Instructor = 25% * The student teacher seminar instructor determines the final grade and, if necessary, may override the tallied grade. As appropriate, the following scales will be used: • Rubric Scale: Exemplary = 4; Proficient = 3; Needs Improvement = 2; Unsatisfactory = 1. • Grade Point Scale: 3.72 =A 3.6 = A.3.48 = B+ 3.32 =B 3.2 = B.3.08 = C+ 2.92 =C 2.8 = C.2.68 = D+ 2.4 = D Below 2.4 = F Student Teacher Seminar Grading Policy You are strongly encouraged to submit student teacher seminar assignments on time! An assignment that is 15 minutes to 1 week late will receive a maximum of 75% credit. An assignment that is 8 or more days late will receive a maximum of 50% credit. The late policy does not extend past the last day of classes of the UMass Amherst semester. After this point, all missing assignments must still be completed but will receive a grade of zero. The portion of your final grade that comes from student teacher seminar will be weighted as follows: Assignment  Percentage of Final Grade  Midpoint Reports (2)  15  Final Reports (2)  15  Weekly assignments (reflections, Measure of Student Learning Worksheet, Student Survey Summary and Report, Finalized Goal and Implementation Form, etc.)  30  Resume  20  Sample Cover Letter  20  Awarding of “Incomplete” (INC) In compliance with university policy, an Incomplete (INC) will only be considered if sufficient and appropriate evidence exists to warrant such action and the student is passing the course. The student must initiate the request for an “Incomplete.” OTHER INFORMATION UMass Academic Honesty Statement Since the integrity of the academic enterprise of any institution of higher education requires honesty in scholarship and research, academic honesty is required of all students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Academic dishonesty is prohibited in all programs of the University. Academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating, fabrication, plagiarism, and facilitating dishonesty. Appropriate sanctions may be imposed on any student who has committed an act of academic dishonesty. Instructors should take reasonable steps to address academic misconduct. Any person who has reason to believe that a student has committed academic dishonesty should bring such information to the attention of the appropriate course instructor as soon as possible. Instances of academic dishonesty not related to a specific course should be brought to the attention of the appropriate department Head or Chair. Accommodation Your success in this class is important to me. We all learn differently and bring different strengths and needs to the class. If there are aspects of the course that prevent you from learning or make you feel excluded, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the course requirements. The University of Massachusetts Amherst is committed to providing an equal educational opportunity for all students. If you have a documented physical, psychological, or learning disability on file with Disability Services (161 Whitmore Administration Building; <PHONE>; www.umass.edu/disability), you may be eligible for reasonable academic accommodations to help you succeed in this course. If you have a documented disability that requires an accommodation, please notify me within the first two weeks of the semester so that we may make appropriate arrangements. Observance of religious holy days Students who seek to be absent for religious observances are required by UMass Amherst to give notice no later than the second class meeting by providing the instructor with a date and name of the observance. Respect for Diversity It is my intent that students from all backgrounds and perspectives be well-served by this course, that students' learning needs be addressed both in and out of class, and that the diversity that the students bring to this class be viewed as a resource, strength, and benefit. It is my intent to present materials and activities that are respectful of gender identity, sexuality, disability, age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, race, nationality, religion, and culture. Your suggestions are encouraged and appreciated. Please let me know ways to improve the effectiveness of the course for you personally, or for other students or student groups. Additionally, all people have the right to be addressed and referred to in accordance with their personal identity. In this class, everyone will have the chance to indicate the name that they prefer to be called and, if they choose, to identify pronouns with which they would like to be addressed. I will do my best to address and refer to all students accordingly and support classmates in doing so as well. Wellness and Success You are not alone at UMass Amherst – many people care about your well-being and many resources are available to help you thrive and succeed. During this time, you may be experiencing new stresses related to the COVID-19 pandemic in addition to other pressures such as health, money, family, and academic concerns or stress and trauma from societal inequities and violence. Coursework is challenging and student teaching is not the only demand in your life. You have resilience and are already using effective strategies to help you achieve your educational goals. Take stock of these and consider what new steps or resources could be helpful. Getting enough sleep, exercising, eating well, and connecting with others are all antidotes to stress. If you are struggling academically, reach out to your supervisors and instructors prior to deadlines and before the demands of assignments and responsibilities reach their peak. Students experiencing challenges including stress, anxiety, difficulty concentrating, loneliness, and trauma, or who feel down or alienated, can find it helpful to connect with one or more of the many supportive resources on campus that stand ready to assist you. Resources on campus include, but are not limited to, the following: • Writing Center (http://www.umass.edu/writingcenter) • Learning Resource Center (http://www.umass.edu/lrc) • Student Success (https://www.umass.edu/studentsuccess) • Center for Counseling and Psychological Health (CCPH) (http://www.umass.edu/counseling) • English as a Second Language (ESL) Program (http://www.umass.edu/esl) FRAMEWORKS AND OBJECTIVES FOR STUDENT TEACHING UMass Educator Licensure Conceptual Framework Underlying the approach used by all UMass teacher preparation programs in order to accomplish the standa is a shared conceptual framework: • Collaboration --Educators recognize the imperative of collaboration -that we cannot achieve our vision for student learning as independent actors working in isolation. Educators exhibit attitudes, dispositions, and behaviors consistent with a collaborative approach to professional practice, as opposed to an individualistic or competitive approach to professional practice. • Reflective Practice --Educators recognize the imperative of reflective practice – that to transform the status quo we must be willing to consistently examine and transform assumptions about professional practice. Educators exhibit attitudes, dispositions, and behaviors consistent with a reflective approach to professional practice that allows them to adapt practices based on considered reflection. • Multiple Ways of Knowing --Educators recognize the imperative of multiple ways of knowing – that to create communities of practice, we must respect the perspectives of different stakeholders. In a spirit of inquiry, educators reflect on and challenge their own perspectives and beliefs and maintain a professional awareness of the influences that their perspectives may have in educational settings. • Social Justice --Educators recognize the imperative of social justice – that we cannot achieve our vision of access to and success in education for all students without knowledge of and attention to the student’s social, cultural, developmental, and personal context. Educators exhibit attitudes, dispositions, and behaviors consistent with promoting social justice that allow them to adopt practices that create and advance equitable conditions in which all students can learn. • Evidence-Based Practice --Educators recognize the imperative of evidence-based practices that promote student engagement, achievement, and performance. In so doing the candidate be able to: 1) gather and/or examine multiple sources of evidence, 2) determine the credibility, reliability, and validity of the evidence, 3) synthesize and draw conclusions from evidence, and 4) use the evidence to modify professional practices that result in increased PK-12 student learning outcomes. Resource Contacts • <NAME>, Ph.D., Coordinator of Student Teaching: <EMAIL> • <NAME>, Ph.D., Interim Coordinator of Music Education: <EMAIL> • Ed Prep Office Support: <EMAIL>. Use this email if you need to contact anyone in the Ed Prep Office for support. o <NAME>, Ed.D., UMass Assistant Dean for Educator Preparation o <NAME>, UMass Educator Licensure Officer o <NAME>, UMass Tk20 Assistant Unit Plan Requirements All music student teachers are required to design and teach a minimum of 1 instructional unit within their elementary student teaching placement. In addition, this instructional unit must be uploaded to the student teacher’s Field Experience Binder (FEB) on Tk20 by the FEB submission deadline. Instructional units uploaded to the FEB must have been designed and, whenever possible, taught in their entirety by the student teacher during the elementary student teaching placement. The main unit plan files (overview, scope and sequence, lesson plans, etc.) uploaded to the FEB should be in either Word or PDF format. Supplementary files (photos, audio files, etc.) may be in other formats. Unit plans must be composed of 3 or more lessons or mini-lessons and must be organized around concepts/themes and based on established goals (content standards, course or program objectives, or learning outcomes) that are appropriate for the age and developmental level of the elementary students to whom the unit will be taught. The unit should not simply be a collection of all the lessons you have taught in a particular student teaching placement. The instructional units that you upload to your FEB should include the following: 1. Overview. Create a 0.5 to 1.5-page (single-spaced) overview of the unit, including (a) a description of the unifying concept, theme, or standard, (b) information about the students for which the unit has been created (age, grade, developmental level, musical expectations), and (c) a rationale explaining why this unit is appropriate and important for the chosen group of students. 2. Scope and Sequence. Create a 1 to 2-page chart illustrating the scope and sequence of the unit. Use the Music Education Program’s Unit Plan Scope and Sequence Template (posted on Moodle) for your chart. If you need a refresher, the scope is how much of the concept-or theme-related material you are going to teach during the unit (i.e., the breadth and depth of the unit), and the sequence is the order in which you are going to teach the material or lessons within the unit. Together, a scope and sequence of learning bring order to the delivery of content, supporting maximized student learning while offering sustained opportunities for learning. Without a carefully-considered scope and sequence, there is the risk of haphazard delivery of content, which can negatively affect student learning. 3. Lesson Plans. Please include a lesson plan for each of the 3 required lessons or mini-lessons that comprise the unit. Use the Music Education Program’s Classroom Lesson Plan Template (posted on Moodle) for each lesson plan. 4. Student Teacher-Created Materials. With the exception of media files, please include examples of all materials you create for each unit. These could include, but are not limited to: (a) assessments, (b) study guides, (c) musical arrangements, (d) warm-ups or other exercises, (e) worksheets, (f) PDF files of slide show presentations, (g) photos of bulletin board displays or manipulatives, etc. Tk20 has very limited upload capabilities and storage for media files; however, if you utilize media in your instruction, you may wish to include brief excerpts of the media files you created. 5. Other Materials. Please also include citations for pieces of music or books including publisher information, and whenever possible, a list of web links for published materials you utilize in your instructional units Music Field Experience Binder Requirements Revised 01/04/23 FEB Sections/Tabs  CAP Essential Elements  FEB Evidence  Curriculum, Planning and Assessment  1.A.3: Well-Structured Lesson  . 4 lesson plans from each placement (other than curriculum unit lesson plans) . Curriculum unit from elementary placement (see Unit Plan Requirements in this syllabus and on Moodle for required files)  1.B.2: Adjustment to Practice  . Reflection assignment on adjustment to practice . 2 samples of assessments from each placement (4 total)  Teaching All Students  2.A.3: Meeting Diverse Needs  . 1 sample of candidate-created instructional materials from each placement (2 total) that meet the needs of diverse groups of students, with rationale for the appropriateness of these materials (i.e., why/how these materials meet the needs of diverse groups of students) . Demographics and data form/reflection assignment (2 total: 1 from each placement)  2.B.1: Safe  . Classroom setup diagram from each placement  Learning  with written description/explanation  Environment  . Evidence and/or description of school policies, procedures, guidelines, and/or rules for each placement . Introductory letter to parents from each placement  2.E.1: High Expectations  . Reflection assignment on high expectations  Professional Culture  4.A.1: Reflective Practice  . Student Teacher Seminar midpoint and final reports . Measure of Student Learning Worksheet  . Student Feedback Survey summary and report . Finalized Goal and Implementation Form  Practicum  . Lesson plan and reflection report for each formal observation by your program supervisor (4 lesson plans and 4 “Post-Observation Reflection Forms”) . Program Supervisor’s Observation Form for each formal observation (download this from Tk20) . Formative assessment candidate worksheet (“Pre-Observation Planning Form” for Observation #2) with answers that include one or more examples of evidence for each CAP Essential Element in that observation. . Summative assessment candidate worksheet (“Pre-Planning Observation Planning Form” for Observation #4) with answers that include one or more examples of evidence for each CAP Essential Element in that observation. . Practicum hours log and signature sheet for each placement showing that the requisite hours have been met.  Program  1.A.1: Music  . Current unofficial transcript  Specific  Subject Matter  . Music MTEL score report  Subject Matter  Knowledge  Knowledge  Standards  CAP Essential Elements  . No need to upload anything to this section.  CAP Form Candidate Assessment of Performance Form  Section 1: General Information (to be completed by the Candidate and the Program Supervisor)  Candidate Information  First Name:  Last Name:  Street Address:  City/Town:  State:  Zip:  MEPID #:  Massachusetts license number (if applicable):  Program Information  Sponsoring Organization:  Program Area & Grade Level:  Have any components of the approved program been waived? 603 CMR 7.03(1)(b)  Yes No  Practicum Information  Practicum Practicum Equivalent  Practicum/Equivalent Course Number:  Credit hours:  Practicum/Equivalent Seminar Course Title:  Practicum/Equivalent Site:  Grade Level(s) of Students:  Supervising Practitioner Information (to be completed by the Program Supervisor)  Name:  School District:  Position:  License Field(s):  MEPID or License #  # of years experience under license:  Initial Professional  To the best of my knowledge (per the Supervising Practitioner’s  Yes No Principal/Evaluator), the Supervising Practitioner has received a summative  evaluation rating of proficient or higher in his most recent evaluation.  Name:  Date:  Candidate Assessment of Performance Form  Section 2: Total Hours and Signatures  Three-Way Meetings  1st Three-Way Meeting Date:  Candidate  Supervising Practitioner  Program Supervisor  2nd Three-Way Meeting Date:  Candidate  Supervising Practitioner  Program Supervisor  Final Three-Way Meeting Date:  Candidate  Supervising Practitioner  Program Supervisor  Total Number of Practicum Hours:  Number of hours assumed full responsibility in the role:  Based on the candidate’s performance as measured on the CAP Rubric, we have determined this candidate to be:  Ready to Teach  Not Yet Ready  Supervising Practitioner  Date:  Program Supervisor  Date:  Mediator (if necessary see: 603 CMR 7.04(4))  Date:  CAP Rubric I.A.1: Subject Matter Knowledge  I-A-1. Subject Matter Knowledge  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  Demonstrates limited knowledge of the subject matter and/or its pedagogy; relies heavily on textbooks or resources for development of the factual content. Rarely engages students in learning experiences focused on complex knowledge or subject-specific skills and vocabulary.  Demonstrates factual knowledge of subject matter and the pedagogy it requires by sometimes engaging students in learning experiences that enable them to acquire complex knowledge and subject-specific skills and vocabulary.  Demonstrates sound knowledge and understanding of the subject matter and the pedagogy it requires by consistently engaging students in learning experiences that enable them to acquire complex knowledge and subject-specific skills and vocabulary, such that they are able to make and assess evidence-based claims and arguments.  Demonstrates expertise in subject matter and the pedagogy it requires by consistently engaging all students in learning experiences that enable them to acquire, synthesize, and apply complex knowledge and subject-specific skills and vocabulary, such that they are able to make and assess evidence-based claims and arguments. Models this practice for others.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  I.A.3: Well-Structured Units and Lessons  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  Delivers individual  Implements lessons  Adapts as needed and  Adapts as needed and  lessons rather than  and units of instruction  implements standards- implements standards- units of instruction;  to address some  based units comprised  based units comprised  constructs units of  knowledge and skills  of well-structured  of well-structured  instruction that are not  defined in state  lessons with  lessons with  I-A-3.  aligned with state  standards/local  challenging tasks and  challenging tasks and  Well. standards/local  curricula with some  measurable outcomes;  measurable outcomes;  Structured  curricula and/or  elements of  appropriate student  appropriate student  Units and  designs lessons that  appropriate student  engagement  engagement  Lessons  lack measurable  engagement  strategies, pacing,  strategies, pacing,  outcomes, fails to  strategies, but some  sequence, resources,  sequence, resources,  include appropriate  student outcomes are  and grouping;  and grouping;  student engagement  poorly defined and/or  purposeful  purposeful  strategies, and/or  tasks are not  questioning; and  questioning; and  includes tasks that  challenging.  strategic use of technology and digital  strategic use of technology and digital  mostly rely on lower level thinking skills.  media; such that students are able to learn the knowledge and skills defined in state standards/local curricula.  media; such that all students are able to learn and apply in authentic contexts the knowledge and skills defined in state standards/local curricula. Models this practice for others.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  I.B.2: Adjustments to Practice  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  Makes few  May analyze some  Analyzes results from a  Regularly organizes  adjustments to  assessment results but  variety of assessments  and analyzes results  practice based on  only occasionally  to determine progress  from a variety of  formal and informal  adjusts practice or  toward intended  assessments to  I-B-2. Adjustments to Practice  assessments.  modifies future instruction based on the findings.  outcomes and uses these findings to adjust practice and identify and/or implement differentiated interventions and enhancements for students.  determine progress toward intended outcomes and uses these findings to adjust practice in real-time and in upcoming lessons or units by (a) identifying and/or implementing appropriate differentiated interventions and enhancements for all students, and (b) making appropriate modifications to lessons and units. Models this practice for others.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  II.A.3: Meeting Diverse Needs  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  Uses limited and/or  May use some  Uses appropriate  Uses a variety of  inappropriate  appropriate  inclusive practices,  appropriate  practices to  practices to  such as tiered  inclusive practices,  accommodate  accommodate  supports and  such as tiered  II-A-3. Meeting Diverse Needs  differences.  differences, but fails to address an adequate range of differences.  scaffolded instruction, to accommodate differences in students’ learning needs, abilities, interests, and levels of readiness, including those of academically advanced students, students with disabilities, and English learners.  supports and scaffolded instruction, to address specific differences in individual students’ learning needs, abilities, interests, and levels of readiness, creating structured opportunities for each student to meet or exceed state standards/local curriculum and behavioral expectations. Models this practice for others.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  II.B.1: Safe Learning Environment  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  II-B-1. Safe Learning Environment  Maintains a physical environment that is unsafe or does not support student learning. Uses inappropriate or ineffective rituals, routines, and/or responses to reinforce positive behavior or respond to behaviors that interfere with students’ learning.  May create and maintain a safe physical environment but inconsistently maintains rituals, routines, and responses needed to prevent and/or stop behaviors that interfere with all students’ learning.  Uses rituals, routines, and appropriate responses that create and maintain a safe physical and intellectual environment where students take academic risks and most behaviors that interfere with learning are prevented.  Uses rituals, routines, and proactive responses that create and maintain a safe physical and intellectual environment where students take academic risks and play an active role—individually and collectively—in preventing behaviors that interfere with learning. Models this practice for others.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  II.E.1: High Expectations  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  II-E-1. High Expectations  Does not communicate specific academic and behavior expectations to students, and gives up on some students or communicates that some cannot master challenging material.  Occasionally communicates expectations for student work, effort, and behavior in the classroom, but inconsistently enforces these expectations and/or does little to counteract student misconceptions about innate ability.  Clearly communicates high standards for student work, effort, and behavior, and consistently reinforces the expectation that all students can meet these standards through effective effort, rather than innate ability.  Effectively communicates high standards for student work, effort, and behavior such that students take ownership of meeting them; models and reinforces ways that students can master challenging material through effective effort, and successfully challenges misconceptions about innate ability. Models this practice for others.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  IV.A.1: Reflective Practice  Unsatisfactory  Needs Improvement  Proficient  Exemplary  IV-A-1. Reflective Practice  Demonstrates limited reflection on practice and/or use of insights gained to improve practice.  May reflect on the effectiveness of lessons/ units and interactions with students by oneself, but not with colleagues and/or rarely uses insights to improve practice.  Regularly reflects on the effectiveness of lessons, units, and interactions with students, both individually and with colleagues, and uses insights gained to improve practice and student learning.  Regularly reflects on the effectiveness of lessons, units, and interactions with students, both individually and with colleagues; uses and shares back with colleague’s insights gained to improve practice and student learning.  Quality  *  Scope  *  Consistency  *  