Stat 111 Elementary Statistics Syllabus --Spring 2023 Moodle in the Cloud: The Moodle in the Cloud course web page is the official page for this course. eBook, supplement notes, homework links, announcements, grade book etc. will be post there. Instructor: Dr. <PROF_FULL_NAME> Office: LGRT122D; E-mail: <PROF_EMAIL> Office Hours: TTh: 11:30 -1:00pm Discussion Sessions: Conducted by TA (Discussion schedule and location can be found on your Spire) Textbook: Seeing Through Statistics (4th edition) by Jessica Utts. Register WebAssign and eBook through the Moodle course. WebAssign access and eBook together are built within your Moodle course, as long as you register into and access WebAssign through your Moodle accounts; you can do homework and view the eBook within your Moodle course. The first time you access Stat 111 course and WebAssign through your Moodle accounts, you will be prompted to either create a WebAssign/Cengage account with a Username and Password or enter your existing Cengage login credentials if you already have a Cengage account. Students need pay eBook+WebAssign fee directly to Cengage online, which is required for this course Questions: Every Monday – Friday from 1 – 3 PM (Now -Feb 10th) students can join our Cengage support team via the Zoom link below and get immediate assistance with their WebAssign registration and/or purchasing questions. Here is the Zoom link to get live help: Zoom Link: <LINK_ZOOM> Course Description: This four-credit course satisfies the R2 general education requirements for graduation. This course covers: Sampling methods, types of studies, critical reading of statistics in the news, graphical representation of data, central tendency and variability, normal distribution, the basics of probability, correlation versus causation, sampling distributions, confidence interval estimation and margin of error, and hypothesis testing. PrerequisitesStat 111 is intended for students who have completed advanced algebra and geometry. The course is highly computational, and some algebra is required. Students who are unsure of their preparation should consider taking Math 100. Exams All exams are closed book. Be sure to bring your Umass student ID card and any other exam allowed supplies (like laptop, pens, pencils) when you attend the Exams. All of students must take the regular exam unless you are qualified to take an official make-up exam, which has been permitted by me, which follows procedure of make-up request. As long as an exam has been taken, it can NOT be retaken. Make-up request: All of students should check your travel plan and exam schedules of your courses carefully. If you have any schedule conflicts along with university policy, let me know at least one week before the exam. Any late requests, except medical emergency with Doctor’s note, will be refused. Which case and where is the official support document for the make-up request? (1) if you have an exam schedule conflicts with the regular exam, you should contact Office of University Registrar and send it to your instructor with a written request. (2) if you have a university travel for university business during the regular exam date, like an athletic competition or academic conference etc., you should ask your supervisor or your coach to write an explanation letter including his/her phone number to your instructor as the official written document. Your instructor may verify the event by phone call. (3) if you have a religious observance on regular exam date and can NOT take the exam, you should write an explanation letter yourself and attach the invitation letter or relevant information as the official document. (4) if you have a medical reason and can’t take the regular exam, you should ask a medical professional's statement including his/her phone number which indicate that you were unable for medical reason to take the scheduled exam. If the medical professional's statement is not given before the exam, your make-up request will be refused. Homework All students require the WebAssign online homework system, which you may self-enroll the online homework system through the Moodle course. Please watch the instruction video at <LINK>, then register WebAssign through your Moodle account to do homework or study eBook there. You can discussion homework with others, but you have to write your answers yourself. Follow Moodle deadlines to keep up with learning paces. There is no make-up or extension for homework. No homework grades will be dropped. Discussion sections Attendance at discussions is mandatory. There will be 14 discussion sections meets. Their purpose is to present group and individual activities aimed at reinforcing the lecture material, discuss homework, projects and giving quizzes. Attendance Attendance will be taken at the lectures/discussion sessions every time after drop-add period. It is very important that each student is responsible for knowing what goes on in the lecture/discussion; that is, for obtaining lecture notes, for knowing of any announcements. Note that exams and quizzes are sometimes based on material presented in class but not in the textbook. Attendance has 5% of course grade. Deduct 0% for missing up to 3 times; Deduct 1% for missing up to 5 times; Deduct 2% for missing up to 7 times; Deduct 3% for missing up to 9 times; Deduct 4% for missing up to 11 times; Deduct 5% for missing more than 11 times; Although I am vaccinated and boosted for covid-19, I try to wear a KN95/N95 mask throughout the semester. There is no hybrid or asynchronous learning option. If you know you will miss a class, please email to me ahead of time about how to catch up on the material. Quizzes In each week beginning the 2rd week, there will be a quiz each week. Check the course Moodle page for the schedule. The lowest two quizzes grades will be dropped to accommodate students missing quizzes due to the conflicts or emergencies. There are no make-ups for quizzes. Grading Final averages will be weighted as follows: Quizzes: 10% Homework: 35% Attendance: 5% Test1, 2, 3: 30% Final Exam: 20% The course letter-grade scale without round: A  A.  B+  B  B.  C+  C  C.  D+  D  F  90  87  83  79  75  71  67  63  59  55  <55  For example, since 90-100 is A and 87-90 is A-this means 89.999 still an A-and not rounded up to a 90.000 which is an A. Moodle grades are the official grades while Webassign scores are just raw scores which will be transfer to Moodle. Accommodation Statement The University of Massachusetts Amherst is committed to providing an equal educational opportunity for all students. If you have a documented physical, psychological, or learning disability on file with Disability Services (DS), you may be eligible for reasonable academic accommodations to help you succeed in this course. If you have a documented disability that requires an accommodation, please notify your instructor within the first two weeks of the semester so that we may make appropriate arrangements. Special accommodation request: new disability students should be certified by Umass disability service center (DSC) at first, then you should ask DSC to send the special accommodation documents to your instructor at least one week before the exam, then you may contact DSC, <NAME> Exam Proctoring Coordinator examsaccess@admin.umass.edu <PHONE> 169A Whitmore directly to schedule an appointment, DSC will notify you when and where to take the exam in a few days before the exam. For the documented disability students, DSC will notify you when you should schedule the final exam in DSC. Inclusion: This page https://www.umass.edu/studentlife/advocacy-inclusion-support links to support centers for different groups of students. In my class I will try to make your default gender they/their/theirs unless you tell me otherwise. (I will try to remember if you do, but the older I get, the more I forget.) My chosen gender is he/him/his. Academic Honesty StatementSince the integrity of the academic enterprise of any institution of higher education requires honesty in scholarship and research, academic honesty is required of all students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Academic dishonesty is prohibited in all programs of the University. Academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to: cheating, fabrication, plagiarism, and facilitating dishonesty. Appropriate sanctions may be imposed on any student who has committed an act of academic dishonesty. Instructors should take reasonable steps to address academic misconduct. Any person who has reason to believe that a student has committed academic dishonesty should bring such information to the attention of the appropriate course instructor as soon as possible. Instances of academic dishonesty not related to a specific course should be brought to the attention of the appropriate department Head or Chair. Since students are expected to be familiar with this policy and the commonly accepted standards of academic integrity, ignorance of such standards is not normally sufficient evidence of lack of intent (http://www.umass.edu/dean_students/codeofconduct/acadhonesty/). Calculator Calculator: Students can use the calculator to help the computing. NOTE: Sharing of calculators is not allowed on exams and quizzes. Tentative schedule for STAT 111, Spring 2023 Week  Textbook Sections  Notes  Feb 5  Chapter 1, 2  Feb 12  Chapter 3, 4  2/13: Last day to add or drop any  Feb 19  Chapter 5, 6  Feb 26  Test1(02/28), Chapter 7, 8  March 5  Chapter 9, 10, 11  March 12  Spring Break  March 19  Chapter 12, 13  March 26  Test2(03/28), Chapter 13  April 2  Chapter 14, 16  April 9  Chapter 19, 20  April 16  Patriot’s holiday, Chapter 21  April 23  Test3(04/25), Chapter 22  April 30  Chapter 22/23, Chapter 23  May 7  Chapter 24, Practice  May 14  Review, Reading day  May 16 last day of classes  May 21  Final Exam May23 Tuesday 1-3pm  at regular lecture class room  